Kani optimisation blog post (#41)
model-checking/kani-verifier-blog: _posts/2023-07-31-optimizing-kani.md

---
layout: post

> title:  "Optimizing Kani"

Author: done

---

Kani is a verification tool that can help you systematically test properties about your Rust code.
To learn more about Kani, check out the [Kani tutorial](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/kani-tutorial.html) and our [previous blog posts](https://model-checking.github.io/kani-verifier-blog/).

Over the past 9 months we have optimised Kani at different levels to either improve general performance or solve some specific performance problems encountered on some user benchmarks.

The performance improvements are illustrated here on s2n-quic reference (Synthesis of gains achieved between Nov 2022 and July 2023)

@karkhaz can we place an analysis of the benchcomp results in this section ?

- `kani --solver=minisat` vs `kani --solver=cadical` (using the kani 0.32 and cbmc 5.88.0)
- `kani --write-json-symtab` vs `kani` (using the kani 0.32 and cbmc 5.88.0), isolating the the codegen + goto model export time.

> - `kani` `v0.32` running with `cbmc  v5.70.0` vs cbmc `cbmc v5.88.0` (for union field sensitivity).

Author: replaced with proper intro

> In this post, we'll discuss three optimizations enabled through different components of Kani. But before that, we'll provide a high-level overview of Kani's architecture.

Author: done

# Kani Architecture Overview

First, let's briefly introduce you to Kani's high level architecture to understand where modifications were performed.

> From the user perspective, independently on how you invoke Kani, via cargo or directly invoking the Kani binary, the verification process is very similar. The user invokes Kani and provides cargo packages or a Rust crate that should be verified. Kani will execute until it can check all existing harnesses, and it will report whether each harnesses was successfully verified or failed.

Reviewer: sure - but are readers going to be aware? The blog is a medium for us to reach out to more users who maybe have never used Kani.

> From the user perspective, independently on how you invoke Kani, via cargo or directly invoking the Kani binary, the verification process is very similar. The user invokes Kani and provides cargo packages or a Rust crate that should be verified. Kani will execute until it can check all existing harnesses, and it will report whether each harnesses was successfully verified or failed.

Reviewer 2: Looks good. Resolved.

Internally, this verification process is a bit more complicated, and can be split into three main stages:

1. **Compilation:** The Rust crate under verification and its dependencies are compiled into a program in a format that's more suitable to verification.
2. **Symbolic execution:** This program is then symbolically executed in order to generate a single logic formula that represents all possible execution paths and the properties to be checked.

> 3. **Satisfiability solving:** This logic formula is then solved by employing a SAT or SMT solver that either finds a combination of concrete values that can satisfy the formula (a counter example to a safety property or user assertion exists), or prove that no assignment can satisfy the formula (the program is safe and all assertion hold).

Author: simplified to just "properties"

> Kani in fact employs a collection of tools to perform the different stages of the verification. Kani's main process is called `kani-driver`, and its main purpose is to orchestrate the execution and communication of these other tools:

Author: fixed

1. The compilation stage is done mostly[^build-details] by the kani-compiler, which is an extension of the Rust compiler that we have developed. The kani-compiler will generate a `goto-program` by combining all the logic that is reachable from a harness.
2. For the symbolic execution stage Kani invokes [CBMC](https://www.cprover.org/cbmc/).
3. The satisfiability checking stage is performed by CBMC itself, by invoking a [satisfiability (SAT) solver](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SAT_solver) such as [MiniSat](http://minisat.se/).

Finally, Kani ships with a crate (named `kani`) that provides a set of APIs that defines attributes, functions, traits and implementations that allow users to create and customize their harnesses. This crate is automatically added as a dependency to every other crate Kani compiles.

<!-- double-wrapping means we can click to enlarge -->
![Kani architecture](/kani-verifier-blog/assets/images/kani-high-level.png)

> Note that the verification problem is computationally hard. Thus, some optimisations can have a positive effect only on a subset of harnesses, while other optimisations can bring benefits overall. Kani was design to provide a good out-of-the box experience, but also to allow experimentation and further customization to achieve an optimal performance for each harness.

Reviewer 2: Was resolved.

> [^build-details]: To verify [Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/cargo/) packages, Kani employs Cargo to correctly build all the dependencies before translating them to goto-programs.

Author: I'd rather keep it there since it logically is a footnote to that section

> [^build-details]: To verify [Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/cargo/) packages, Kani employs Cargo to correctly build all the dependencies before translating them to goto-programs.

Reviewer 2: Fair. Resolving.

The table below reports time and memory consumption required for  codegen and symbol table export steps for three crates of the `s2n-quic` project, run using `kani --tests --only-codegen`.
The time includes Rust to MIR compilation time, GOTO code generation from MIR time and GOTO binary export, either through JSON and `symtab2gb`, or directly to GOTO binary.

> | Crate               | JSON export    |               |                                | GOTO binary export |               |                                |

Author: fixed

| ------------------- | -------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------ | ------------- | ------------------------------ |
|                     | System time(s) | User time (s) | Maximum resident set size (kb) | System time(s)     | User time (s) | Maximum resident set size (kb) |
| `s2n-quic-core`     | 29             | 198           | 669868                         | 22                 | 111           | 815076                         |
| `s2n-quic-platform` | 13             | 99            | 449652                         | 13                 | 91            | 450128                         |
| `s2n-quic-xdp`      | 11             | 92            | 450128                         | 11                 | 95            | 450708                         |

> We can see that for `s2n-quic-core`, which contains over 35 individual harnesses, the User time required to compile and export is reduced by almost 45% 199s to 111s, for a 20% memory consumption increase. For the two other crates which contain respectively 3 and 1 harnesses, the User time gains are lower at 10% and even negative at -4%, for a negligible memory consumption increase.

Author: fixed

Looking in more detail at individual harnesses (only for GOTO code generation and GOTO binary export time, without Rust to MIR compilation) we see that the time for JSON symbol table export used to dominate the GOTO code generation, and that direct GOTO binary export is now faster than GOTO code generation from MIR.

> | Harness                                                     | GOTO codegen time (s) | JSON export (s) | GOTO-binary export (s) | export speedup | codegen + export speedup |

Author: This table is now in a collapsible details section

| `message::cmsg::tests::round_trip_test...`                  | 0,37                  | 1,59            | 0,19                   | 8,36           | 3,50                     |
| `message::cmsg::tests::iter_test...`                        | 0,77                  | 3,75            | 0,41                   | 9,14           | 3,83                     |
| `message::msg::tests::address_inverse_pair_test...`         | 0,85                  | 4,07            | 0,43                   | 9,46           | 3,84                     |
| `task::completion_to_tx::assign::tests::assignment_test...` | 0,36                  | 1,48            | 0,17                   | 8,70           | 3,47                     |
|                                                             | **Total**             | **Total**       | **Total**              | **Avg**        | **Avg**                  |
|                                                             | 22,8                  | 114,66          | 12,33                  | 9,29           | 3,90                     |

> GOTO binary export is now the default because it is faster when there are multiple proof harnesses in a crate, but the switch `--write-json-symbtab` activates the JSON export if you need it. The memory consumption can be sometimes higher, but can also sometimes be lowe depending on how much opportunity for sharing of identical subtrees the crate offers.

Author: fixed

> ## Details on the GOTO binary format

Reviewer 2: This section was supposed to be foldable, right?

Reviewer: I agree. it should be foldable.

Author: fixed

struct IrepId;

// a generic tree node
struct Irep {
    // node identifier, defines the interpretation of the node
    id: IrepId,
    // Subtrees indexed by integer
    sub: Vec<Rc<Irep>>,
    // Subtrees keyed by name
    named_sub: Map<IrepId, Rc<Irep>>,
}
```

`Ireps` are tagged by an `IrepId` (an interned string) giving them their meaning. An `Irep` references other `Ireps` through reference counted smart pointers. `Ireps` also allow safe sharing of subtrees, with a copy-on-write update mechanism. For instance the expression `x + y` would be represented by an `Irep` similar to this:

```rust
Irep {
    id = IrepId("+"),
    sub: Vec(
        Irep(
            id = "symbol_expr",
            named_sub: Map((IrepId("identifier"), Irep(id: IrepId("x"))))
        ),
        Irep(
            id = "symbol_expr",
            named_sub: Map((IrepId("identifier"), Irep(id: IrepId("y"))))
        ),
    )
}
```

The serialization/deserialization algorithm for GOTO binaries uses a technique called *value numbering* to avoid repeating identical `Ireps` and strings in the binary file, and uses *7-bit variable length encoding* for integer values to reduce the overall file size.

> A *value numbering function* for a type `K` is a function that assigns a unique number in the range `[0, N)` to each value in a multiset `S` of values of type `K` ((multiset: some values can be repeated).  Numberings are usually implemented using a hash map of type `HashMap<K, usize>`. Each value 'k' in the set `S` is numbered by performing a lookup in the map: if an entry for `k` is found, return the associated value, otherwise insert a new entry `(k, numbering.size())` and return the unique number for that entry. Value numbering for `Ireps` uses vectors of integers built from the unique numbers of the `Irep` fields as keys. An `Irep` is uniquely numbered by recursively numbering its id, subtrees and named subtrees, assembling a key from these unique numbers and looking up the unique number for that key in the numbering. Since two `Ireps` with the same id, subtrees and named subtrees are represented by the same key, the unique number of the key identifies the `Irep` by its contents. CBMC's binary serde algorithm uses numbering functions for `Ireps` and `Strings` that are used as a cache of already serialised Ireps and Strings. An `Irep` node is fully serialised only the first time it is encountered. Later occurrences are serialised by reference, i.e. only by writing their unique identifier. This achieves maximum sharing of identical subtrees and strings in the binary file.

Author: fixed

The *7-bit variable length encoding* scheme for integers works as follows: an integer of `N` bytes is serialised to a list of `M` bytes, where each byte encodes a group of seven bits of the original integer and one bit signals the continuation or termination of the list. For instance, the decimal value 32bit decimal `190341` is represented as `00000000000000101110011110000101` in binary. Splitting this number in groups of 7-bits starting from the right, we get `0000101 1001111 0001011 0000000 0000`. We see that all bits in the two last groups are false, so only the first three groups will be serialised. With continuation bits added (represented in parentheses), the encoding for this 4-byte number only uses 3-bytes:  `(1)0000101(1)1001111(0)0001011`.

## Making Constant Propagation Field-Sensitive for Union Types in CBMC

> Union types are very common in goto-programs emitted by Kani, due to the fact that Rust code typically uses `enums`, which are themselves modelled as tagged unions at the goto-program level. Initially the *field sensitivity* transform in CBMC enabled constant propagation for individual array cells and in individual struct fields, but not for union fields. Constant propagation helps pruning control flow branches during symbolic execution and can greatly reduce the runtime of an analysis. Ensuring that constant propagation also works for union fields is important for Rust programs. We extended field-sensitivity  to union fields  in [cbmc-5.71.0](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/releases/tag/cbmc-5.71.0), [PR 7230](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/pull/7230). This vastly improved performance for Rust programs manipulating  `Vec<T>`  data types, and allowed us to solve a number performance issues reported by our users: [#705](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/705)  [#1226](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1226)  [#1657](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1657)  [#1673](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1673)  [#1676](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1676).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Union types are very common in goto-programs emitted by Kani, due to the fact that Rust code typically uses `enum`s, which are themselves modelled as tagged unions at the `goto-program` level.
Initially the *field sensitivity* transform in CBMC enabled constant propagation for individual array cells and in individual struct fields, but not for union fields.
Constant propagation helps pruning control flow branches during symbolic execution and can greatly reduce the runtime of an analysis.
Ensuring that constant propagation also works for union fields is important for Rust programs.
We extended field-sensitivity  to union fields  in [cbmc-5.71.0](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/releases/tag/cbmc-5.71.0), [PR 7230](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/pull/7230).
This vastly improved performance for Rust programs manipulating  `Vec<T>`  data types, and allowed us to solve a number performance issues reported by our users: [#705](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/705)  [#1226](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1226)  [#1657](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1657)  [#1673](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1673)  [#1676](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1676).
```

Author: fixed

u.b             bbbbbbbb
idx.   16       7      0
      MSB             LSB
```

The transform introduces a variable `u_a` to represent `u.a`, and a variable `u_b` to represent `u.b`. These two variables are not independent, and every-time one of the fields is updated in the original program, both variables are updated in the transformed program. 

Applying the transform to the following program:

```c
int main() {
  union {
    unsigned long a;
    unsigned int b;
  } u;

  u.a = 0x0000000000000000;
  u.b = 0x87654321;
  assert(u.a == 0x0000000087654321);
  assert(u.b == 0x87654321);
  return 0;
}
```

produces the following transformed program:

```c
int main() {
  unsigned long u_a;
  unsigned int u_b;

  // the bytes of u_b are equal the low bytes of u_a
  u_b = (unsigned int) u_a;

  // u.a = 0x0000000000000000;
  u_a = 0x0000000000000000;
  u_b = (unsigned int) 0x0000000000000000;

  // u.b = 0x87654321;
  u_a = (u_a & 0xFFFFFFFF00000000) | ((unsigned long) 0x87654321);
  u_b = 0x87654321;

  // assert(u.a == 0x0000000087654321);
  assert(u_a == 0x0000000087654321);

  // assert(u.b == 0x87654321);
  assert(u_b == 0x87654321);
  return 0;
}
```

# Conclusion

> The cumulative effects of these changes provides for a better user experience, faster code-generation times, greatly reduced peak memory consumption, and better analysis performance.

Reviewer 2: +1

> The cumulative effects of these changes provides for a better user experience, faster code-generation times, greatly reduced peak memory consumption, and better analysis performance.

Author: fixed

---
layout: post
title:  "Optimizing Kani"
---

> Kani is a verification tool that can help you systematically test properties about your Rust code.

Reviewer 2: Looks like it was done.

To learn more about Kani, check out the [Kani tutorial](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/kani-tutorial.html) and our [previous blog posts](https://model-checking.github.io/kani-verifier-blog/).

> Over the past 9 months we have optimised Kani at different levels to either improve general performance or solve some specific performance problems encountered on some user benchmarks.

Reviewer: fair. maybe remove the word "some". It is taking away from the sentence/point.

> Over the past 9 months we have optimised Kani at different levels to either improve general performance or solve some specific performance problems encountered on some user benchmarks.

Author: now using `proof harness` everywhere

> Over the past 9 months we have optimised Kani at different levels to either improve general performance or solve some specific performance problems encountered on some user benchmarks.

Reviewer 2: Resolved.

> The performance improvements are illustrated here on s2n-quic reference (Synthesis of gains achieved between Nov 2022 and July 2023)

Author: replaced
